1. Visual Studio Express
Visual Studio has an advantage when it comes to programming. This IDE is mostly used by corporate programmers to produce .NET code. 
Sometimes people want to try the product without investing thousands of dollars first, so Microsoft has the Express editions for all 
of their products. This makes it perfect for casual users that want to hack out some code as a hobby or programmers who need a free 
solution to code in C#.
Advantages - Intellisense, Automatic code formatting, Extensibility, Compiles Code
Cons - CPU Hog, Overwhelming GUI, Cost

2. Eclipse
The interface is a lot cleaner and concise than Visual Studio and the languages that are possible to use extend past the .Net Framework. 
Besides being the number on way to develop Android applications via the Android SDK, it is fully extensible to use languages such as Ruby, 
C, C++ and many many more.
Advantages - Language Extensibility, Free, Compiles Code
Cons - Steep Learning Curve

3. Netbeans
The is the number one alternative to Eclipse. This program is extensible and free, and it compiles code which is a bonus. When installing 
Netbeans it comes with a Java server called GlassFish that you could deploy on your computer for your testing environment. This server is 
the second biggest server for Java next to WebSphere (which is a whole different ball game).
Advantages - Extensible, Compiles Code, Free
Cons - Bloated

4. kate
Kate is exactly how the website describes it, a text editor. Not to be looked down upon as it does a lot more than a regular text edit can 
do and that is what makes this an indispensable product.
Advantages - Uses Linux, Code Folding
Cons - KDE Overhead, Doesn’t Compile Code

5. gedit
gedit is the official editor of the gnome desktop and comes installed once the system is setup. Very useful for the user that is casually 
editing code and not undertaking major projects. This would be a good companion to Netbeans or Eclipse.
Advantages - Uses Linux, Already Installed on gnome systems, Code Highlighting, Tabbed
Cons - Doesn’t Compile Code
